MIT License
Copyright (c) 2025 Emir Baha Yıldırım
Please see the LICENSE file for more details.

> [!NOTE]
> Just a small note, I won't use the word "C++" in my notes. I'll just say
> "cpp". Just to let you know, so that you don't get confused.

# Introduction to C++

C++ is a popular, high-level, cross-platform, object-oriented, general purpose
programming language created by Bjarne Stroustrup in 1985. First it was
released as an extension of the C programming language, adding OOP features;
as of 1997/C++98 standardization, C++ has added functional features, in
addition to facilities for low-level memory manipulation.

## Philosophy of C++

Throughout C++'s life, its development and evolution has been guided by a set
of principles:

- It must be driven by actual problems and its features should be immediately
useful in real world programs.
- Every feature should be implementable (with a reasonably obvious way to do
so).
- Programmers should be free to pick their own programming style, and that
style should be fully supported by C++.
- Allowing a useful feature is more important than preventing every possible
misuse of C++.
- It should provide facilities for organizing programs into separate,
well-defined parts, and provide facilities for combining separately developed
parts.
- No implicit violations of the type system (but allow explicit violations;
that is, those explicitly requested by the programmer).
- User-created types need to have the same support and performance as built-in
types.
- Unused features should not negatively impact created executables (e.g. in
lower performance).
- There should be no language beneath C++ (except assembly language).
- C++ should work alongside other existing programming languages, rather than
fostering its own separate and incompatible programming environment.
- If the programmer's intent is unknown, allow the programmer to specify it by
providing manual control.
