MIT License
Copyright (c) 2025 Emir Baha Yıldırım
Please see the LICENSE file for more details.

> [!NOTE]
> As we've established, sometimes it may be better to have a data structure
> that is actually less powerful, but optimized to the brim to perform certain
> operations incredibly fast. We'll examine two specialty structures, namely
> **stacks**, and **queues**.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Stack ADT

A *stack* is an ADT that serves as a collection of elements with two main
operations:
- **push,** which adds an element to the collection, and
- **pop,** which removes the most recently added element.

Additionally, a *peek* operation can, without modifying the stack, return the
value of the last element added.

This order of operation is also known as `Last-In-First-Out`, `LIFO`. The
elements are stored in order of insertion, but we do not think of them as
having indexes. The client can only add/remove/examine the last element added,
a.k.a. the `top` of the stack.

## Where are stacks used?

- **Programming Languages and Compilers:**
    - Method/function calls are placed onto a stack (call = push, return = pop)
    - Compilers use stacks to evaluate expressions.

- **Matching Up Related Pairs of Things:**
    - Find out whether a string is a palindrome
    - Matching tags/curly braces
    - Convert `infix` expressions to `postfix` or `prefix` expressions, and you
    have no idea about this. If you want to learn, check the footnote[^1].

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

#### `Infix`, `Postfix`, `Prefix`

[^1]: Please see [footnote 1](#infix-postfix-prefix)
